Doc: Documentation for identity and access management (#13134)
canonical/lxd: doc/authorization.md

Reviewer: Can you move this file to the explanation folder?
The only reason the authentication file is on the main level is that it was there before we restructured the docs, and we don't want to move it since it would cause broken links. New files should go in the correct location. ;)

---
relatedlinks: https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/identity-and-access-management-for-lxd/41516
---

(authorization)=
# Remote API Authorization

When LXD is {ref}`exposed over the network <server-expose>` it is possible to restrict API access via two mechanisms:

- {ref}`restricted-tls-certs`
- {ref}`fine-grained-authorization`

(restricted-tls-certs)=
## Restricted TLS certificates

> It's possible to restrict a {ref}`TLS client <authentication-trusted-clients>` to one or multiple projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to restrict a {ref}`TLS client <authentication-trusted-clients>` to one or multiple projects.
```
Just to be consistent. ;)

In this case, the client will also be prevented from performing global configuration changes or altering the configuration (limits, restrictions) of the projects it's allowed access to.

To restrict access, use [`lxc config trust edit <fingerprint>`](lxc_config_trust_edit.md).
Set the `restricted` key to `true` and specify a list of projects to restrict the client to.
If the list of projects is empty, the client will not be allowed access to any of them.

(fine-grained-authorization)=
## Fine-grained authorization

It is possible to restrict {ref}`OIDC clients <authentication-openid>` to granular actions on specific LXD resources.
For example, one could restrict a user to be able to view, but not edit, a single instance.

There are four key concepts that LXD uses to manage these fine-grained permissions:

> - __Entitlements__: An entitlement encapsulates an action that can be taken against a LXD API resource type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Entitlements**: An entitlement encapsulates an action that can be taken against a LXD API resource type.
```
For consistency, please use `**` for bold.

   Some entitlements might apply to many resource types, whereas other entitlements can only apply to a single resource type.
   For example, the entitlement `can_view` is available for all resource types, but the entitlement `can_exec` is only available for LXD resources of type `instance`.
- __Permissions__: A permission is the application of an entitlement to a particular LXD resource.

>    For example, given the entitlement `can_exec` which is only defined for instances, a permission is the combination of `can_exec` and a single instance, as uniquely defined by its API URL i.e. `/1.0/instances/c1?project=foo`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For example, given the entitlement `can_exec` that is only defined for instances, a permission is the combination of `can_exec` and a single instance, as uniquely defined by its API URL (for example, `/1.0/instances/c1?project=foo`).
```

- __Identities (users)__: An identity is any authenticated party that makes requests to LXD, including TLS clients.
   When an OIDC client adds a LXD server as a remote, the OIDC client is saved in LXD as an identity.
   Permissions cannot be assigned to identities directly.
- __Groups__: A group is a collection of one or more identities.
   Identities can belong to one or more groups.
   Permissions can be assigned to groups.

>    TLS clients cannot currently be assigned to groups.

Reviewer: So that means that you cannot assign a permission to a TLS client?
(Just to make sure I understand it correctly from what is written.)

Author: No. TLS clients are still using the existing TLS authorization driver until we have fixed any issues and validated the performance of fine-grained auth.

(permissions)=
### Explore permissions

> To discover available permissions that may be assigned to a group, or view permissions that are currently assigned, run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To discover available permissions that can be assigned to a group, or view permissions that are currently assigned, run the following command:
```

  However, this permission does not allow access to server configuration, storage pool configuration, or certificate/identity management.
- The `operator` entitlement on entity type `project` grants access to create, edit, and delete all resources belonging to the project against which the permission is granted.
  Members of a group with this permission will not be able to edit the project configuration itself.
  This is equivalent to a restricted TLS client with access to the same project.
- The `user` entitlement on entity type `instance` grants access to view an instance, pull/push files, get a console, and begin a terminal session.
  Members of a group with this entitlement cannot edit the instance configuration.

```{note}
Due to a limitation in the LXD client, if `can_exec` is granted to a group for a particular instance, members of the group will not be able to start a terminal session unless `can_view_events` is additionally granted for the parent project of the instance.
We are working to resolve this.
```

(identities)=
### Explore identities

> To discover available identities that may be assigned to a group, or view identities that are currently assigned, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To discover available identities that can be assigned to a group, or view identities that are currently assigned, run the following command:
```

    lxc auth identity list

The authentication method column displays the method by which the client authenticates with LXD.

The type column displays the type of identity.
Identity types are a superset of TLS certificate types and additionally include OIDC clients.

The name column displays the name of the identity.

> For TLS clients, this will be the name of the certificate as shown in the certificates API.

Reviewer: Is the name only shown in the certificates API, or also in `lxc config trust list`. If both, no need to specify this:

```suggestion
For TLS clients, this will be the name of the certificate.
```

> For OIDC clients this will be the name of the client as given by the IdP (requested via the [profile scope](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-basic-1_0.html#Scopes)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For OIDC clients this will be the name of the client as given by the :abbr:`IdP (identity provider)` (requested via the [profile scope](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-basic-1_0.html#Scopes)).
```

The identifier column displays a unique identifier for the identity within that authentication method.
For TLS clients, this will be the certificate fingerprint.
For OIDC clients, this will be the email address of the client.

The groups column displays any groups that are currently assigned to the identity.
Groups cannot currently be assigned to TLS clients.

```{note}

> For OIDC clients to be displayed in the list of identities, they must first add the LXD server as a remote.

Reviewer: This sounds a little awkward to me. Not quite sure if this is what you're trying to say:

```suggestion
The list of identities only displays OIDC clients that have added the LXD server as a remote.
```

If not, leave as is, it IS correct after all. ;)

Author: How about: `OIDC clients will only be displayed in the list of identities once they have authenticated with LXD.`

Adding the LXD server as a remote isn't actually a requirement but rather an assumed first step on my part.

```

(access-management)=

> ### Access management

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Manage permissions
```
or
```suggestion
### Grant group permissions
```

(This is really a how-to - we should make that clear through the title.)

> In LXD, identities cannot be granted permissions directly. Instead, permissions are added to groups, and groups are added to identities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In LXD, identities cannot be granted permissions directly. Instead, identities are added to groups, and permissions are granted to groups.
```

To create a group, run:

    lxc auth group create <group_name>

> To add a group to an identity, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add an identity to a group, run:
```

    lxc auth identity group add <authentication_method>/<identifier> <group_name>

> For OIDC clients, this is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, for OIDC clients:
```

    lxc auth identity group add oidc/<email_address> <group_name>

The identity is now a member of the group. To add permissions to the group, run:

    lxc auth group permission add <group_name> <entity_type> [<entity_name>] <entitlement> [<key>=<value>...]

Here are some examples:

- `lxc auth group permission add administrator server admin` grants members of `administrator` the `admin` entitlement on `server`.
- `lxc auth group permission add junior-dev project sandbox operator` grants members of `junior-dev` the `operator` entitlement on project `sandbox`.
- `lxc auth group permission add my-group instance c1 user project=default` grants members of `my-group` the `user` entitlement on instance `c1` in project `default`.

Some entity types require more than one supplementary argument to uniquely specify the entity.
For example, entities of type `storage_volume` and `storage_bucket` require an additional `pool=<storage_pool_name>` argument.

(identity-provider-groups)=

> ### Identity provider groups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use groups defined by the identity provider
```

(I'm not quite happy with "use" here, but I can't think of anything better right now ...)

It is common practice to manage users, roles, and groups centrally via an identity provider (IdP).
In LXD, identity provider groups allow groups that are defined by the IdP to be mapped to LXD groups.
When an OIDC client makes a request to LXD, any groups that can be extracted from the client's identity token are mapped to LXD groups, giving the client the same effective permissions.

> To configure IdP group mappings in LXD, first you must configure your IdP to add groups to identity and access tokens as a custom claim.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure IdP group mappings in LXD, first configure your IdP to add groups to identity and access tokens as a custom claim.
```

This configuration depends on your IdP.

> In [Auth0](https://auth0.com/), you can add the "roles" that a user has as a custom claim via an [action](https://community.auth0.com/t/how-to-add-roles-and-permissions-to-the-id-token-using-actions/84506).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [Auth0](https://auth0.com/), for example, you can add the "roles" that a user has as a custom claim via an [action](https://community.auth0.com/t/how-to-add-roles-and-permissions-to-the-id-token-using-actions/84506).
```

Alternatively, if {abbr}`RBAC (role-based access control)` is enabled for the audience, a "permissions" claim can be added automatically.
In Keycloak, you can define a [mapper](https://keycloak.discourse.group/t/anyway-to-include-user-groups-into-my-jwt-token/8715) to set Keycloak groups in the token.

> LXD must then be configured to extract this claim.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then configure LXD to extract this claim.
```

> To do so, set the value of the [`oidc.groups.claim`](server-options-oidc) configuration key to the value of the field name of the custom claim:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, set the value of the {config:option}`server-oidc:oidc.groups.claim` configuration key to the value of the field name of the custom claim:
```

    lxc config set oidc.groups.claim=<claim_name>

> LXD will then expect the claim to be set in identity and access tokens as a JSON array containing a string value for each group name.

Reviewer: Not sure I understand ... maybe:

```suggestion
LXD will then expect the claim to to contain the group names (the identity and access token should contain a JSON array containing a string value for each group name).
```

Author: How about:

> LXD will then expect a claim to present in identity and access tokens with this name. The value of the claim must be a JSON array containing a string value for each IdP group name.

Reviewer: The part I don't understand is "a claim to present in identity and access tokens". Might just be me not understanding what a claim is. :wink:

Maybe: "LXD will then expect the identity and access tokens to contain a claim with this name."
